Reintroduce authorization documentation (#3673)
apollographql/router: docs/source/configuration/authorization.mdx

    clients -->|"Request"| router;

  classDef padding padding-left:1em, padding-right:1em
  ```

## How it works

The Apollo Router provides access controls via **authorization directives**. Using the `@requiresScopes` and `@authenticated` directives, you can define access to specific fields and types across your supergraph:

- The [`@requiresScopes`](#requiresscopes) directive allows granular access control through the scopes you define.
- The [`@authenticated`](#authenticated) directive works in a binary way: authenticated requests can access the specified field or type, and unauthenticated requests can't.

For example, imagine you're building a social media platform that includes a `Users` subgraph. You can use the [`@requiresScopes`](#requiresscopes) directive to declare that viewing other users' information requires the `read:user` scope:

```graphql
type Query {
  users: [User!]! @requiresScopes(scopes: [["read:users"]])
}
```

You can use the [`@authenticated`](#authenticated) directive to declare that users must be logged in to update their own information:

```graphql
type Mutation {
  updateUser(input: UpdateUserInput!): User! @authenticated
}
```

> You can define both directives—together or separately—at the field level to fine-tune your access controls.

Reviewer: Curious about this one: is there a benefit to using the escaped values rather than the more human-readable ones?

- **JWT authentication configuration**: If you configure [JWT authentication](./authn-jwt), the Apollo Router [automatically adds a JWT token's claims](./authn-jwt#working-with-jwt-claims) to the request's context at the `apollo_authentication::JWT::claims` key.
- **Adding claims via coprocessor**:  If you can't use JWT authentication, you can [add claims with a coprocessor](/customizations/coprocessor#adding-authorization-claims-via-coprocessor). Coprocessors let you hook into the Apollo Router's request-handling lifecycle with custom code.
- **Augmenting JWT claims via coprocessor**: Your authorization policies may require information beyond what your JSON web tokens provide. For example, a token's claims may include user IDs, which you then use to look up user roles. For situations like this, you can [augment the claims](./authn-jwt#claim-augmentation-via-coprocessors) from your JSON web tokens with coprocessors.

## Authorization directives

Before using the authorization directives in your subgraph schemas, ensure your router instances are ready to work with them:
  - Make sure you're using version `1.28.1` or later of the Apollo Router.

>   - Make sure your router instances are [connected to your GraphOS Enterprise organization](/graphos/enterprise-features/#enabling-enterprise-features).

Reviewer: I'm folding these into the top level prereqs (I'm a little wary of lengthening the prereqs section due to previous feedback), but lmk if you feel strongly this needs to be in its own subheader https://github.com/apollographql/router/pull/3673/commits/b1e60585cc77ed0b63d4bc2574447692b39ab3bf

The router can execute the entire query successfully if the request includes the `read:others read:emails` scope set.

### `@authenticated`

The `@authenticated` directive marks specific fields and types as requiring authentication.
It works by checking for the `apollo_authentication::JWT::claims` key in a request's context, that is added either by the JWT authentication plugin, when the request contains a valid JWT, or by an authentication coprocessor.
If the key exists, it means the request is authenticated, and the router executes the query in its entirety.
If the request is unauthenticated, the router removes `@authenticated` fields before planning the query and only executes the parts of the query that don't require authentication.

#### Usage

To use the `@authenticated` directive in a subgraph, you can [import it from the `@link` directive](/federation/federated-types/federated-directives/#importing-directives) like so:

```graphql
extend schema
  @link(
    url: "https://specs.apollo.dev/federation/v2.5",
    import: [..., "@authenticated"])
```

#### Example `@authenticated` use case

> Diving deeper into the social media example: let's say unauthenticated users can view a post's title, author, and content.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Diving deeper into the [social media example](#example-requiresscopes-use-case): let's say unauthenticated users can view a post's title, author, and content.
```

}
```

You can define both directives&mdash;together or separately&mdash;at the field level to fine-tune your access controls.
GraphOS [composes](#composition-and-federation) restrictions into the supergraph schema so that each subgraph's restrictions are respected.
The router then enforces these directives on all incoming requests.

## Prerequisites

> > ⚠️ Only the Apollo Router support authorization directives&mdash;[`@apollo/gateway`](/federation/v1/gateway/) does _not_. Checkout out the [migration guide](../migrating-from-gateway/) if you'd like to use them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> ⚠️ Only the Apollo Router supports authorization directives&mdash;[`@apollo/gateway`](/federation/v1/gateway/) does _not_. Check out out the [migration guide](../migrating-from-gateway/) if you'd like to use them.
```

Reviewer: TY!
